DataLad as DVC for ML analysis (#569)
datalad-handbook/book: docs/beyond_basics/101-168-dvc.rst

.. _dvc:

Reproducible machine learning analyses: DataLad as DVC
------------------------------------------------------

> Machine learning analysis are complex:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Machine learning analyses are complex:
```
?

Author: thx

Beyond data preparation and general scripting, they typically consist of training and optimizing several different machine learning models and comparing them based on performance metrics.

> This complexity can jeopardize reproducibility -- its hard to remember or figure out which model was trained on which version of what data and which has been the ideal optimization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This complexity can jeopardize reproducibility -- it is hard to remember or figure out which model was trained on which version of what data and which has been the ideal optimization.
```

> But just like any data analysis project, machine learning projects can become easier to understand and reproduce if they are intuitively structured, appropriately version controlled, and if analyses executions are captured with enough (ideally machine-readable and re-executable) provenance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But just like any data analysis project, machine learning projects can become easier to understand and reproduce if they are intuitively structured, appropriately version controlled, and if analysis executions are captured with enough (ideally machine-readable and re-executable) provenance.
```

.. figure:: ../artwork/src/ML.svg

DataLad provides the functionality to achieve this, and :ref:`previous <yoda>` :ref:`sections <containersrun>` have given some demonstrations on how to do it.

> But in the context of machine learning analyses, other domain-specific tools and workflows exist, too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But in the context of machine learning analyses, other domain-specific tools and workflows exist too.
```

One of the most well-known is `DVC (Data Version Control) <https://dvc.org/>`__, a "version control system for machine learning projects".
This section compares the two tools and demonstrates `workflows for data versioning, data sharing, and analysis execution <https://realpython.com/python-data-version-control/>`_ in the context of a machine learning project with DVC and DataLad.
While they share a number of similarities and goals, their respective workflows are quite distinct.

The workflows showcased here are based on a `DVC tutorial <https://realpython.com/python-data-version-control/>`__.
This tutorial consists of the following steps:

> - A data set with pictures of 10 classes of objects (`Imagenette <https://github.com/fastai/imagenette>`_) is version controlled with DVC

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A dataset with pictures of 10 classes of objects (`Imagenette <https://github.com/fastai/imagenette>`_) is version controlled with DVC
```
`dataset` is more prevalent form used in the handbook and aligns with the `dataset` (not `data_set`) notion in datalad etc.  So better here and elsewhere in the book (there is a few hits) to be used.

Reviewer: Oh, IMHO too subtle , I will leave it up to you

> - the data is pushed to a "storage remote" on a local path

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the data content is pushed to a "storage remote" on a local path
```
or (I thought it would be less appropriate since probably only data content is pushed, not entire dataset, but I am not yet there to judge)
```suggestion
- the dataset is pushed to a "storage remote" on a local path
```

Author: I would phrase it like this for DataLad, but as far as I understand DVC, they actually copy the data that's added to DVC.

Reviewer: This data duplication effect must be noted, with a remark that git annex does the same on crippled file system

Author: Done (although further down, in data sharing)

> - the data is analyzed using various ML models in DVC pipelines

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the dataset is analyzed using various ML models in DVC pipelines
```
or
```suggestion
- the data are analyzed using various ML models in DVC pipelines
```

> This handbook section is structured in the form of a comparison.

Reviewer: I still don't like "comparison" ...  May be

```suggestion
This handbook section demonstrates how DataLad could be used as an alternative to DVC.
```

> We demonstrate each step with DVC according to their tutorial, and then recreate a corresponding DataLad workflow for a direct comparison.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We demonstrate each step with DVC according to their tutorial, and then recreate a corresponding DataLad workflow.
```

> If you want to, you can code along, or only browse through the direct comparisons of DVC and DataLad commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to, you can code along, or simply read through the presentation of DVC and DataLad commands.
```

Some familiarity with DataLad can be helpful, but if you have never used DataLad, footnotes in each section can point you relevant chapters for more insights on a command or concept.

> If you have never used DVC, `their technical docs <https://dvc.org/doc/command-reference>`_ or `collection of third-party tutorials <https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/issues/1749>`_ can be of help for further questions.

Reviewer: no need to get "personal" ;)
```suggestion
If you have never used DVC, `its technical docs <https://dvc.org/doc/command-reference>`_ or `collection of third-party tutorials <https://github.com/iterative/dvc.org/issues/1749>`_ can answer further questions.
```

Author: I didn't mean to :)

.. admonition:: If you are not a Git user

   DVC relies heavily on Git workflows.
   Understanding the DVC workflows requires a solid understanding of :term:`branch`\es, Git's concepts of `Working tree, Index ("Staging Area"), and Repository <https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Recording-Changes-to-the-Repository>`_, and some basic Git commands such as ``add``, ``commit``, and ``checkout``.

>    `The Turing Way <https://the-turing-way.netlify.app/welcome.html>`_ has an excellent `chapter on version control with Git <https://the-turing-way.netlify.app/reproducible-research/vcs.html>`_ if you want to catch up on some basics first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   `The Turing Way <https://the-turing-way.netlify.app/welcome.html>`_ has an excellent `chapter on version control with Git <https://the-turing-way.netlify.app/reproducible-research/vcs.html>`_ if you want to catch up on those basics first.
```

.. gitusernote::

>    Be mindful: DVC comes with a range of commands and concepts that have the same names, but differ in functionality to their Git namesake.

Reviewer: well, to be fair I would have said
```suggestion
   Be mindful: DVC (as DataLad) comes with a range of commands and concepts that have the same names, but differ in functionality to their Git namesake.
```

Author: yeah, true. :)

   Make sure to read the `DVC documentation <https://dvc.org/doc/command-reference>`_ for each command to get more information on what it does.

Setup
^^^^^

The `DVC tutorial <https://realpython.com/python-data-version-control/>`_ comes with a pre-made repository that is structured for DVC machine learning analyses. If you want to code along, `the repository <https://github.com/datalad-handbook/data-version-control.git>`_ needs to be :term:`fork`\ed (requires a GitHub account) and cloned from your own fork [#f1]_.

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-101
   :workdir: DVCvsDL
   :language: console

   ### DVC
   # please clone this repository from your own fork when coding along
   $ git clone git@github.com:datalad-handbook/data-version-control.git DVC

The resulting Git repository is already pre-structured in a way that aids DVC ML analyses: It has the directories ``model`` and ``metrics``, and a set of Python scripts for a machine learning analysis in ``src/``.

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-102
   :workdir: DVCvsDL
   :language: console

   ### DVC
   $ tree DVC

For a comparison, we will recreate a similarly structured DataLad dataset.

> For greater compliance with DataLad's :ref:`YODA principles <yoda>`, the dataset structure will differ marginally in that scripts will be kept in ``code/`` instead of ``src``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For greater compliance with DataLad's :ref:`YODA principles <yoda>`, the dataset structure will differ marginally in that scripts will be kept in ``code/`` instead of ``src/``.
```

We create the dataset with two configurations, ``yoda`` and ``text2git`` [#f2]_.

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-103
   :workdir: DVCvsDL
   :language: console

   ### DVC-DataLad
   $ datalad create -c text2git -c yoda DVC-DataLad
   $ cd DVC-DataLad
   $ mkdir -p data/{raw,prepared} model metrics

Afterwards, we make sure to get the same scripts.

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-104
   :workdir: DVCvsDL/DVC-DataLad
   :language: console

   ### DVC-DataLad
   # get the scripts
   $ datalad download-url -m "download scripts for ML analysis" \
     https://raw.githubusercontent.com/datalad-handbook/data-version-control/master/src/{train,prepare,evaluate}.py \
     -O 'code/'

Here's the final directory structure:

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-105
   :workdir: DVCvsDL/DVC-DataLad
   :language: console

   ### DVC-DataLad
   $ tree

.. findoutmore:: Required software for coding along

>    In order to code along, `DVC <https://dvc.org/doc/install>`__, `scikitlearn <https://scikit-learn.org/stable/>`_, `scikit-image <https://scikit-image.org/>`_, `pandas <https://pandas.pydata.org/>`_, and `numpy <https://numpy.org/>`_ are required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In order to code along, `DVC <https://dvc.org/doc/install>`__, `scikit-learn <https://scikit-learn.org/stable/>`_, `scikit-image <https://scikit-image.org/>`_, `pandas <https://pandas.pydata.org/>`_, and `numpy <https://numpy.org/>`_ are required.
```

DataLad workflow
""""""""""""""""

DataLad has means to get data or data archives from web sources and store their origin.
This has several advantages:
For one, the original S3 bucket is known and stored as a location to re-retrieve the data from.
This enables reliable data access for yourself and others that you share the dataset with.
Beyond this, the data is also automatically extracted and saved, and thus put under version control.
Note that this strays slightly from DataLad's :ref:`YODA principles <yoda>`: in a DataLad-centric workflow, data would become a standalone, reusable dataset that would be linked as a subdataset.
Here, we stick to the project organization of DVC though.

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-114
   :workdir: DVCvsDL/DVC
   :language: console

   ### DVC-DataLad
   $ cd ../DVC-DataLad
   # datalad > 13.4 needs the configuration option -c datalad.runtime.use-patool=1
   $ datalad -c datalad.runtime.use-patool=1 download-url \
     --archive \
     --message "Download Imagenette dataset" \
     'https://s3.amazonaws.com/fast-ai-imageclas/imagenette2-160.tgz' \
     -O 'data/raw/'

> At this point, the data is already version controlled [#f6]_, but the directory structure doesn't resemble that of the DVC dataset yet -- the extracted directory adds one unnecessary directory layer::

Author: I know, but each of those approaches required a second step, so I picked the one I liked better ;-) I can change, if you want.

> At this point, the data is already version controlled [#f6]_, but the directory structure doesn't resemble that of the DVC dataset yet -- the extracted directory adds one unnecessary directory layer::

Reviewer: nah, I am of no strong opinion here.  This way might actually be cleaner since we move solely to match DVC workflow

At this point, a copy of the data still resides in the cache of the repository.
This data is copied back to ``val/`` with the :command:`dvc checkout` command:

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-128
   :workdir: DVCvsDL/DVC
   :language: console

   ### DVC
   $ dvc checkout data/raw/val.dvc

If the cache of the repository would be empty, the data can be re-retrieved into the cache from the data remote.
To demonstrate this, let's look at a repository with an empty cache by cloning this repository from GitHub into a new location.

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-129
   :workdir: DVCvsDL/DVC
   :language: console

   ### DVC
   # clone the repo into a new location for demonstration purposes:
   $ cd ../
   $ git clone git@github.com:datalad-handbook/data-version-control.git DVC-2

Retrieving the data from the data remote to repopulate the cache is done with the :command:`dvc fetch` command:

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-130
   :workdir: DVCvsDL
   :language: console

   ### DVC
   $ cd DVC-2
   $ dvc fetch data/raw/val.dvc

Afterwards, another :command:`dvc checkout` will copy the files from the cached back to ``val/``.

> Alternatively, the command :command:`dvc pull` performs ``fetch`` (get data into the cache) and ``checkout`` (copy data from the cache to its original location) in a single command.

Author: Yes, if I understand it correctly, there is data duplication "by design" unless the file system by chance supports "reflinks". Alternatively, you can actually instruct DVC to use symlinks or hardlinks, but copying files is the default: https://dvc.org/doc/user-guide/large-dataset-optimization#file-link-types-for-the-dvc-cache

> Alternatively, the command :command:`dvc pull` performs ``fetch`` (get data into the cache) and ``checkout`` (copy data from the cache to its original location) in a single command.

Author: hehe, well, as much as I didn't want to "brag" about the benefits of symlinking, I didn't want to highlight the built-in data duplication too much... But sure, I can mention it explicitly

> Alternatively, the command :command:`dvc pull` performs ``fetch`` (get data into the cache) and ``checkout`` (copy data from the cache to its original location) in a single command.

Author: Done

      $ datalad push --to github
        Update availability for 'github': [...] [00:00<00:00, 28.9k Steps/s]Username for 'https://github.com': <user>
        Password for 'https://adswa@github.com': <password>
        publish(ok): /home/me/DVCvsDL/DVC-DataLad (dataset) [refs/heads/master->github:refs/heads/master [new branch]]
        publish(ok): /home/me/DVCvsDL/DVC-DataLad (dataset) [refs/heads/git-annex->github:refs/heads/git-annex [new branch]]

   Next, we can clone this dataset, and retrieve the files:

   .. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-131
      :workdir: DVCvsDL
      :language: console

      ### DVC-DataLad
      # outside of a dataset
      $ datalad clone git@github.com:datalad-handbook/DVC-DataLad.git DVC-DataLad-2
      $ cd DVC-DataLad-2

   .. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-132
      :workdir: DVCvsDL/DVC-DataLad-2
      :language: console
      :lines: 1-4, 3930-3932

      ### DVC-DataLad
      $ datalad get data/raw/val

   The data was retrieved by re-downloading the original archive from S3 and extracting the required files.

Here's an example of pushing a dataset to a local sibling nevertheless:

**Step 1: Set up the sibling**

> DataLad has no direct equivalent of storing *only* annexed data in a local sibling.

Author: Done

instead, it will push everything, including the Git aspect of the dataset.
First, we need to create a local sibling:

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-140
   :workdir: DVCvsDL
   :language: console

   ### DVC-DataLad
   $ cd DVC-DataLad
   $ datalad create-sibling --name my-sibling ../datalad-sibling

**Step 2: Push the data**

Afterwards, the dataset contents can be pushed using :command:`datalad push`.

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-141
   :workdir: DVCvsDL/DVC-DataLad
   :language: console

   ### DVC-DataLad

>    $ datalad publish --to my-sibling

Author: True! thanks for catching this. That was based on https://github.com/datalad/datalad/issues/4888

``src/prepare.py`` will create two ``.csv`` files with mappings of file names in ``train/`` and ``val/`` to image categories.
Later, these files will be used to train and test the classifiers.
``src/train.py`` loads the training CSV file prepared in the previous stage, trains a classifier on the training data, and saves the classifier into the ``model/`` directory as ``model.joblib``.
The final script, ``src/evaluate.py`` is used to evaluate the trained classifier on the validation data and write the accuracy of the classification into the file ``metrics/accuracy.json``.
There are more detailed insights and explanations of the actual analysis code in the `Tutorial <https://realpython.com/python-data-version-control>`_ if you're interested in finding out more.

For workflow management, DVC has the concept of a "DVC pipeline".
A pipeline consists of multiple stages and is executed using a :command:`dvc run` command.
Each stage has three components: "deps", "outs", and "command".
Each of the scripts in the repository will be represented by a stage in the DVC pipeline.

DataLad does not have any workflow management functions.

> The closest to it are :command:`datalad run` to record any command execution or analysis, :command:`datalad rerun` to recompute such an analysis, and :command:`datalad containers-run` to perform and record a command execution or analysis inside of a tracked software container.

Author: There is one somewhere in this section, but I will add it there too

> The closest to it are :command:`datalad run` to record any command execution or analysis, :command:`datalad rerun` to recompute such an analysis, and :command:`datalad containers-run` to perform and record a command execution or analysis inside of a tracked software container.

Author: Done

   :workdir: DVCvsDL/DVC
   :language: console

   ### DVC
   $ git add --all
   $ git commit -m "Train Random Forrest classifier"
   $ dvc commit
   $ git push --set-upstream origin random-forest
   $ git tag -a random-forest -m "Random Forest classifier with 80.99% accuracy."
   $ git push origin --tags
   $ dvc push

At this point, you can compare metrics across multiple tags:

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-166
   :workdir: DVCvsDL/DVC
   :language: console

   ### DVC
   $ dvc metrics show -T

Done!

DataLad workflow
""""""""""""""""

For a direct comparison to DVC, we'll try to mimic the DVC workflow as closely as it is possible with DataLad.

**Model 1: SGD classifier**

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-170
   :workdir: DVCvsDL/DVC
   :language: console

   ### DVC-DataLad
   $ cd ../DVC-DataLad

As there is no workflow manager in DataLad [#f8]_, each script execution needs to be done separately.
To record the execution, get all relevant inputs, and recompute outputs at later points, we can set up a :command:`datalad run` call [#f9]_.
Later on, we can rerun a range of :command:`datalad run` calls at once to recompute the relevant aspects of the analysis.

> If complex software is involved, you could also compose a :command:`datalad containers-run` call [#f10]_ and have that reran, but we'll stay basic here.

Author: much nicer, thanks

.. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-179
   :workdir: DVCvsDL/DVC-DataLad
   :language: console

   $ git diff SGD -- metrics/accuracy.json

Even though there is no one-to-one correspondence between a DVC and a DataLad workflow, a DVC workflow can also be implemented with DataLad.

.. only:: adminmode

   We need to clean up -- reset the state of the "data version control" repo to its original state, force push

   .. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-190
      :workdir: DVCvsDL/DVC
      :language: console

      $ git checkout master
      $ git reset --hard b796ba195447268ebc51e20a778fb2db9f11e341
      $ git push --force origin master
      # delete the branches and tags
      $ git push origin :random_forrest :sgd-pipeline
      $ git tag -d random-forrest sgd-pipeline

Summary
^^^^^^^

DataLad and DVC aim to solve the same problems: Version control data, sharing data, and enabling reproducible analyses.
DataLad provides generic solutions to these issues, while DVC is tuned for machine-learning pipelines.
Despite their similar purpose, the looks, feels and functions of both tools are different, and its a personal decision which one you feel more comfortable with.

> Using DVS requires solid knowledge of Git, because DVC workflows heavily rely on effective Git practices, such as branching, tags, and ``.gitignore`` files.

Author: I haven't come across that in their docs or any tutorial, but maybe I just missed it. We could ask, if we point them here.

But despite the reliance on Git, DVC barely integrates with Git -- changes done to files in DVC can not be detected by Git and vice versa, DVC and Git aspects of a repository have to be handled in parallel by the user, and DVC and Git have distinct command functions and concepts that nevertheless share the same name.
Thus, DVC users need to master Git *and* DVS workflows and intertwine them correctly.

> In return, DVC provides users with workflow management and reporting tuned to machine learning analyses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In return, DVC provides users with workflow management and reporting tuned to machine learning analyses. It also provides a somewhat more lightweight and uniform across operating and file systems approach to "data version control" than git-annex used by DataLad.
```
I think there should be some statement on that.  With `git-annex` we have at times a VERY complex and heterogeneous across systems setup (all the adjusted branches, git link vs symlink, etc).  I think the advantage of DVC in keeping data management very simple (although not as nicely integrated with git) should be mentioned.

Reviewer: I wonder if there is a place (or may be already a reference) which would demonstrate pros of "symlinked" setup of git-annex:  `git checkout` is **very fast** regardless of the sizes of data files etc, and you get your repository in a consistent state with data files of needed versions etc.  How is it (get another consistent state) to be done with `dvc`?

Author: > I wonder if there is a place (or may be already a reference) which would demonstrate pros of "symlinked" setup of git-annex: `git checkout` is **very fast** regardless of the sizes of data files etc, and you get your repository in a consistent state with data files of needed versions etc. How is it (get another consistent state) to be done with `dvc`?

I have footnoted the section on how the object tree works in the section on version controlling data, but haven't explicitly stated such advantages in the text of this section - sounded like "showing of". We could do it down here, maybe?

.. _dvc:

> DataLad versus DVC

Author: good idea

The ``.dvc`` files contain information on the path to the data in the repository, where the associated data file is available from, and a hash, and users are supposed to store them in :term:`Git`.

.. findoutmore:: Download data for coding along

   The data used in the tutorial is the "Imagenette" dataset and can be `downloaded from an Amazon S3 bucket <https://s3.amazonaws.com/fast-ai-imageclas/imagenette2-160.tgz>`_.
   Download the data and extract it into the ``data/raw/`` directory in both repositories.

   .. runrecord:: _examples/DL-101-168-108
      :workdir: DVCvsDL
      :language: console

      # download the data
      $ curl -s https://s3.amazonaws.com/fast-ai-imageclas/imagenette2-160.tgz \
                -O imagenette2-160.tgz
      # extract it
      $ tar -xzf imagenette2-160.tgz
      # move it into the directories in both repositories
      $ cp -r imagenette2-160/train DVC-DataLad/data/raw/
      $ cp -r imagenette2-160/val DVC-DataLad/data/raw/
      $ cp -r imagenette2-160/train DVC/data/raw/
      $ cp -r imagenette2-160/val DVC/data/raw/
      # remove the archive and extracted folder
      $ rm -rf imagenette2-160

>       $ rm imagenette2-160.tgz

Reviewer 2: Would it make sense to mention that we could pull the data straight with datalad?

Author: I've thought about doing this, but then decided to stay procedurally close to the DVC workflow - but, yes, we could definitely mention it

Reviewer: Since you want a "comparison" I think it would be beneficial to show how to do it with DataLad functionality.  This component is really a part of the "DVC workflow".  And you do give examples of "how to do with DVC" so I would have moved this into "DVC" section below AND below in "DataLad workflow" section I would have started with a new dataset (instead of if I got it right just adding datalad on top of what is downloaded here for DVC way) and used `datalad download-url --archive ...` (may be followed with `git mv`?) to demonstrate how easy it is to  get data from external tarballs while keeping the access to them.  Without that I also (may be missed) not sure how you in DataLad workflow add ability to redownload all these input files for reproducibility.

That might also appeal to DVC developers to may be think (again) about integrating/supporting datalad.

Author: Thanks for your thoughts - yes, true, I think you convinced me. Will change this.

Author: Mhhh, what's the most elegant way of downloading the data? 
``datalad download-url --archive 'https://s3.amazonaws.com/fast-ai-imageclas/imagenette2-160' -O 'data/raw/`` results in a downloaded, annexed tar ball:

```
├── data
│   ├── prepared
│   └── raw
│       └── MD5E-s98948031--0edfc972b5c9817ac36517c0057f3869.tar -> ../../.git/annex/objects/32/Px/MD5E-s116828160--1e92a6d123bfaf23515ecbb3dc221cad.tar/MD5E-s116828160--1e92a6d123bfaf23515ecbb3dc221cad.tar
```
``tar -xf``'ing the tarball gets me the extracted data, but untracked. I could move it and save it, but I end up with the tarball and the data in the dataset.I *thought* (but maybe I misunderstood the command so far) that `add-archive-content` would extract my files for me and keep the tarball in a dedicated branch?

Author: @yarikoptic do you see a better way than

```
$ datalad download-url --archive 'https://s3.amazonaws.com/fast-ai-imageclas/imagenette2-160.tgz' -O 'data/raw/.tarballarchive'
$ cd data/raw && datalad add-archive-content --strip-leading-dirs .tarballarchive
```
?

And (sorry for my ignorance here, but I haven't understood add-archive-content fully yet) could you check whether my assumptions here are correct? As I understood it:
-  the original tarball (``.tarballarchive``) and the extracted data from it is currently in the dataset
- the s3 URL origin of the tarball is also registered as a special remote
- I could drop the tarball
- If I would need to reobtain a single extracted file, datalad would re-download the tarball and get it from there

Reviewer: I think there is a bug in datalad (re)implementation of functionality we used from patool: https://github.com/datalad/datalad/issues/4875

workaround -- use patool:
```
datalad -c datalad.runtime.use-patool=1 download-url --archive 'https://s3.amazonaws.com/fast-ai-imageclas/imagenette2-160.tgz' -O 'data/raw/'
```

<details>
<summary>output (takes AWHILE to add all those files without any progress indication: https://github.com/datalad/datalad/issues/4876)</summary> 

```shell
$> datalad -c datalad.runtime.use-patool=1 download-url --archive 'https://s3.amazonaws.com/fast-ai-imageclas/imagenette2-160.tgz' -O 'data/raw/'
[INFO   ] Downloading 'https://s3.amazonaws.com/fast-ai-imageclas/imagenette2-160.tgz' into '/tmp/testds/data/raw/' 
download_url(ok): /tmp/testds/data/raw/imagenette2-160.tgz (file)                                                
add(ok): /tmp/testds/data/raw/imagenette2-160.tgz (file)
save(ok): /tmp/testds (dataset)
[INFO   ] Adding content of the archive /tmp/testds/data/raw/imagenette2-160.tgz into annex AnnexRepo(/tmp/testds) 
[INFO   ] Finished adding /tmp/testds/data/raw/imagenette2-160.tgz: Files processed: 13394, renamed: 13394, +annex: 13394 
action summary:
  add (ok: 1)
  download_url (ok: 1)
  save (ok: 1)
datalad -c datalad.runtime.use-patool=1 download-url --archive  -O 'data/raw/  190.24s user 32.21s system 106% cpu 3:28.88 total
```
</details>

if you check `git log` you will see that there are two commits from this operation -- one adds archive to git/git-annex, 2nd one extracts and removes that tarball.  You could drop tarball if so desired, but you would need to either know checksum, or checkout that commit and drop, or use `git annex unused && git annex drop --unused` tandem:

<details>
<summary>drop unused (.tar was there from previous attempts without patool)</summary> 

```shell
$> du -scm .git/annex
449	.git/annex
449	total
(dev3) 1 10485.....................................:Sat 05 Sep 2020 10:45:59 AM EDT:.
(git)smaug:/tmp/testds[master]git
$> git annex unused && git annex drop --unused
unused . (checking for unused data...) (checking master...) 
  Some annexed data is no longer used by any files:
    NUMBER  KEY
    1       MD5E-s116828160--1e92a6d123bfaf23515ecbb3dc221cad.tar
    2       MD5E-s98948031--0edfc972b5c9817ac36517c0057f3869.tgz
  (To see where data was previously used, try: git log --stat --no-textconv -S'KEY')
  
  To remove unwanted data: git-annex dropunused NUMBER
  
ok
drop MD5E-s98948031--0edfc972b5c9817ac36517c0057f3869.tgz (checking https://s3.amazonaws.com/fast-ai-imageclas/imagenette2-160.tgz...) ok
drop MD5E-s116828160--1e92a6d123bfaf23515ecbb3dc221cad.tar ok
(recording state in git...)
(dev3) 1 10486.....................................:Sat 05 Sep 2020 10:46:13 AM EDT:.
(git)smaug:/tmp/testds[master]git
$> du -scm .git/annex                         
243	.git/annex
243	total

```
</details>

Reviewer: forgot to add listing to show that it worked:
```
$> ls data/raw/imagenette2-160/*    
data/raw/imagenette2-160/train:
n01440764/  n02979186/  n03028079/  n03417042/  n03445777/
n02102040/  n03000684/  n03394916/  n03425413/  n03888257/

data/raw/imagenette2-160/val:
n01440764/  n02979186/  n03028079/  n03417042/  n03445777/
n02102040/  n03000684/  n03394916/  n03425413/  n03888257/
```

Author: Thank you!

Author: Mhhh, getting another interesting error. When I try to push this dataset to a sibling created with "datalad create sibling" I can't push the git-annex branch:

```
datalad push --to my-sibling
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00000293.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00002138.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00003014.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00006697.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00007197.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00009346.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00009379.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00009396.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00010306.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00011233.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
Update availability for 'my-sibling':  75%|████████████████████████        | 3.00/4.00 [00:00<00:00, 29.5k Steps/s]CommandError: 'git push --progress --porcelain my-sibling refs/heads/git-annex:refs/heads/git-annex git-annex:git-annex' failed with exitcode 1 under /tmp/DVC-DataLad
error: dst ref refs/heads/git-annex receives from more than one src.
error: failed to push some refs to '/tmp/datalad-sibling'
```

<details> <summary>Here is what I have ran:</summary>

```
$ datalad create -c text2git -c yoda DVC-DataLad
$ cd DVC-DataLad && mkdir -p data/{raw,prepared} model metrics
$ datalad download-url -m "download scripts for ML analysis" \
     https://github.com/datalad-handbook/data-version-control/blob/master/src/{train,prepare,evaluate}.py \
     -O 'code/'
$ datalad -c datalad.runtime.use-patool=1 download-url --archive 'https://s3.amazonaws.com/fast-ai-imageclas/imagenette2-160.tgz' -O 'data/raw/'
$ mv data/raw/imagenette2-160/* data/raw/ && rmdir data/raw/imagenette2-160
$ datalad save -m "Move data into preferred locations"
$ datalad create-sibling --name my-sibling ../datalad-sibling
$ datalad push --to my-sibling
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00000293.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00002138.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00003014.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00006697.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00007197.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00009346.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00009379.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00009396.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00010306.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
copy(ok): /tmp/DVC-DataLad/data/raw/train/n01440764/ILSVRC2012_val_00011233.JPEG (file) [to my-sibling...]         
Update availability for 'my-sibling':  75%|████████████████████████        | 3.00/4.00 [00:00<00:00, 29.5k Steps/s]CommandError: 'git push --progress --porcelain my-sibling refs/heads/git-annex:refs/heads/git-annex git-annex:git-annex' failed with exitcode 1 under /tmp/DVC-DataLad
error: dst ref refs/heads/git-annex receives from more than one src.
error: failed to push some refs to '/tmp/datalad-sibling'

```

</details>

This also happens when I clone the dataset and add the clone as a sibling.

Author: oh look, the error message seems to suggest an interesting issue: https://git-annex.branchable.com/forum/refs__47__heads__47__synced__47__git-annex_receives_from_more_than_one_src/

Author: I filed https://github.com/datalad/datalad/issues/4888. I think we can express the handbook contribution to DataLad in "bugs per section" :wink:
